Misinformation of COVID‑19

vaccines and vaccine hesitancy
The current study examined various types of misinformation related to the COVID-19 vaccines and
their relationships to vaccine hesitancy and refusal. Study 1 asked a sample of full-time working
professionals in the US (n = 505) about possible misinformation they were exposed to related to the
COVID-19 vaccines. Study 2 utilized an online survey to examine U.S. college students’ (n = 441)
knowledge about COVID-19 vaccines, and its associations with vaccine hesitancy and behavioral
intention to get a COVID-19 vaccine. Analysis of open-ended responses in Study 1 revealed that 57.6%
reported being exposed to conspiratorial misinformation such as COVID-19 vaccines are harmful
and dangerous. The results of a structural equation modeling analysis for Study 2 supported our
hypotheses predicting a negative association between the knowledge level and vaccine hesitancy and
between vaccine hesitancy and behavioral intention. Vaccine hesitancy mediated the relationship
between the vaccine knowledge and behavioral intention. Findings across these studies suggest
exposure to misinformation and believing it as true could increase vaccine hesitancy and reduce
behavioral intention to get vaccinated.
Health misinformation can kill people, both directly and indirectly. During a public health crisis such as the
COVID-19 pandemic, exposure to misinformation about the virus’ spread, symptoms of infection, testing opportunities, and prevention methods can lead to erroneous appraisals of the threat, maladaptive coping behaviors,
and a range of fatal consequences. More critically, misinformation about the new COVID-19 vaccines and their
development process has the potential to induce high levels of vaccine hesitancy in the p
­ ublic1,2, preventing vaccination rates sufficient for achieving herd immunity. Due to the high level of uncertainty caused by the pandemic
and the relatively fast speed of vaccine development compared to other types of traditional vaccines, the public
naturally sought out information to address their vaccine concerns and guide critical decision-making such as
whether to get vaccinated or not. However, separating relevant and valid information from false and distorted
misinformation about COVID-19 vaccines is difficult when a vast amount of material is being conveyed through
media outlets and websites of varying reliability and accuracy. One critically important challenge to obtaining
reliable, accurate COVID-19 vaccine information includes the pervasive, unsolicited, and dubious pseudo-news
items communicated via online and social media platforms by various types of ­actors1.
Because many people acquire and share news via social ­media3, misinformation can spread quickly through
their social networks, and the likelihood of exposure to disinformation and misrepresentations about the vaccine
from unverified sources is high. The resulting increase in public anxiety and negative emotional and behavioral
responses complicates the process of advising the public through health experts and agencies such as the CDC
and WHO. The current research focuses on people’s perceptions of the nature and types of misinformation about
COVID-19 ­vaccines4. Additionally, this research examines the relationship between knowledge about COVID-19
vaccines, including its relevant misinformation, and vaccine hesitancy and refusal.
By acknowledging the serious negative impact of health misinformation and its spread, research in infodemiology (i.e., epidemiology of (mis)information5,6) identifies the knowledge translation gap between evidence
produced by experts and the public’s actual practices and beliefs. Research has identified various quality markers (e.g., source, technical, and content criteria) and their relations with outcome variables (e.g., health-related
knowledge and behavioral changes) necessary for effective health communication on the internet. Studies have
shown both algorithmic-based correction on Facebook and social correction via anonymous commenters can
be effective in reducing beliefs in health misinformation. However, people who believe in conspiracy theories
tend to discredit algorithm-based c­ orrections7,8.
More research is needed to (a) observe and define the trends and prevalence of health misinformation on
various types of social media; (b) understand how relevant misinformation is shared; (c) evaluate the reach and
influence of misinformation; and (d) develop and test effective i­nterventions9,10. With the aim of increasing
