HUMAN VACCINES & IMMUNOTHERAPEUTICS

Confidence in COVID-19 vaccine effectiveness and safety and its effect on vaccine
COVID-19 is a major public health threat associated with increased disease burden, mortality, and economic
loss to countries and communities. Safe and efficacious COVID-19 vaccines are key in halting and reversing
the pandemic. Low confidence in vaccines has been one of the factors leading to hesitancy. We aimed to
assess the COVID-19 vaccine confidence (safety and effectiveness), associated factors, and its effects on
vaccine uptake among general community members in Tanzania. This was a community-based crosssectional survey conducted from December 2021 to April 2022 in six regions of Tanzania mainland and two
regions in Zanzibar. Participants were interviewed using an electronic questionnaire. Multiple logistic
regression models estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for factors associated
with vaccine confidence. All analyses were performed using SPSS version 25.0. The study enrolled 3470
general Tanzanian community members; their mean age was 40.3 (standard deviation ±14.9) years, and
34% were males. The proportion of COVID-19 vaccine confidence was 54.6%. Geographical region,
residence area, COVID-19 disease risk perception, and good knowledge of COVID-19 vaccines were
significantly associated with COVID-19 vaccine confidence. Confidence in COVID-19 vaccines was asso­
ciated with over three times higher odds of vaccine uptake. Confidence in COVID-19 vaccines was low in
Tanzania. Innovative community engagement strategies and region-specific interventions are needed to
improve comprehensive knowledge and address community perceptions and attitudes toward COVID-19
vaccines.


Introduction
Vaccine confidence is an issue of public health concern, espe­
cially in the era of emerging and reemerging infectious diseases.
It is defined by public perceptions of three components: vaccine
safety, effectiveness, and importance.1 Lack of trust and confi­
dence in vaccines is an important determinant of vaccine hesi­
tancy, and it influences uptake, affects national immunization
targets, and increases outbreaks of vaccine-preventable
diseases.1–3 Hesitancy in available childhood and other vaccines
has led to a resurgence of vaccine-preventable diseases such as
measles and diarrhea, and in some instances, it has affected polio
eradication success efforts, threatening years of progress in the
global fight against infectious diseases.4,5 The World Health
Organization (WHO) has identified reluctance or refusal to
vaccinate as one of the 10 global health security threats in 2019
that need to be tracked and addressed by countries.6
